Well,
one of the most interesting things about
perception is a statement by Dr. Rainey, who was a
Special Assistant for Science in the Assistant
Secretary's office, plus the fact is now Chief
Scientist for Office of Naval Research, denies
that I or anybody else ever attempted to
consolidate the oceanographic program in
Washington, and we That is the biggest crock I ever
saw because we tried to, we knocked heads together
during Tex Treadwell's time to set up the Maury
Center and put the research and development
physically at the Naval Research Laboratory and
stuck it in some buildings. And then I guess things
sort of went downhill, but we never got it
completely done. Because if that had been done,
we'd have never had any reason to even look outside
of Washington. Because anybody would rather have
his own organization in his backyard than to have
it, for example, over in a place that is far remote
from where he's getting his dollars. And in fact,
we even called it the Maury Center. We even hired
Dr. Hersey from Woods Hole to try to pull it
together. And we never really pulled it together.
And I hope we can do it this time. Because I think
this is our last chance to pull it together.
Exactly what would you like to put all together?
I'd like to put every bit of ocean science together
under one single manager in the Navy. Now, I am not
one of those people. want to take university
academic research and put it under single czar.
And when Bill Nuremberg told me this, I said, look,
Bill, you're crazy. You want to come to Ed Snyder,
and if I say no, I can't fund you, you don't want to be
able to go to anybody else? I said, you've got the
best of both worlds now. You've got three people
you can go to. You can go to Guy Stever, Ed Snyder, or
Bob Abel. Bob Abel runs the Sea Grant program. Dr.
Stever up until recently ran the National Science
Foundation, and I theoretically ran, and I always
use the word theoretically because in the Navy
you're never sure who runs what. the Navy's
effort. If you put it under one individual,
scientists don't like to knock at one door and not
have another door to go to. And I think that people
who argue that there are 21 agencies plus in
oceanography don't know what they're talking
about in university research because right today
it's probably the best coordinated program in the
federal bureaucracy. In fact, it may even be too
well coordinated. It's coordinated basically
through my being double-hatted to the National
Science Foundation and to Dr. Hughes where the two
of us look at both programs together, and then Bob
Abel, who used to be the executive secretary of the
ICO for whom we used to work together, having such
an interrelationship that I seriously doubt if
you'd want to really take science and coordinate
it any better. Science, I'm talking about, basic
science. Now, the Navy's definition of ocean
science is weird compared to yours because the
Navy's runs even into operational money. It just
happens to divide its program into science,
engineering, operations, and prediction. But
when I have to be careful of my words,
nomenclature, because to use science as
university, to the Navy that's called basic
research 6.1, and to somebody else it's called.
But we're talking about the work done in
universities. And my position has been, since
I've been involved in this program and still is,
that the basic research being done in the
universities and the academic world and
nonprofit organizations of this country in
oceanography can best be done there. And I
maintain a very small capability to do that
internally within the Navy because I think the
rewards and the incentives in the academic
community are greater physically in the
university or the nonprofit than they are within a
Navy industrial type laboratory, even though we
have basic research, as we call it, done in our
laboratories. The reason that I'm trying to
consolidate that group with the people working on
the in-house group is to ensure that the people in
the academic world have some feel for what the
Navy's needs are. The Navy still can provide, even
though it doesn't look like it's providing much
dollars, it still has almost 400 ships. It almost,
I think, something over 100 at sea every day. over a
hundred and thousand people at sea every day, if I
can somehow use some of this to help us solve our
problems, because in addition to the great
scientists, the problem in oceanography is the
lack of capability for collecting information,
and I'm trying to use the operational Navy to
collect information. I'm building a, I've
abolished the weather service, I've changed its
name, I've physically taken it and put it at this
center down in Mississippi to Because the other
end of those people are not dollars, but they're
1,600 and some enlisted men and officers riding
around in aircraft carriers on admiral staffs and
at fleet weather centrals whose only job is to
predict the environment and to forecast it,
taking the information. And if I can use those and
somehow escalate their capability along with the
scientific community, I'd sort of use them as a
negative feedback loop. They're out there where
the user is. The difference between the Navy...
for example, in the foundation, and I'm also
double-hatted at NOAA, is the Navy is a user of its
own science. The National Science Foundation
just does science for science sake. And I'm not
being critical. and perhaps some people say
science for science sake, but I mean science in
order to be able to move forward and
understanding. But they're not going to use the
science themselves. The rest of the country will
probably use it or somebody else. NOAA would like
to say, and they always tell me that they are
producing oceanography for a reason. They are,
but the reason is not for themselves. They don't
depend on oceanography in any sense as a user. They
collect information, bring it together, and give
it to other people to use it. The Navy
theoretically uses everything it does. I think an
interesting thing is the Navy not only uses what it
does, but the Navy uses what the Foundation does,
and the Navy uses what NOAA does, because WODC, the
World Oceanographic Data Center, and the
National Oceanographic Instrument Center were
in fact owned by the Navy during the time that I was
physically in the Washington Arena. Didn't go
back, didn't go out of the Navy until I think 1971
when Nixon reorganized and formed NOAA. I think
the big critical things coming up now in the future
in oceanography are the so-called engineering
and undersea technology in the development cycle
because of the oil interest and because of the
other thing. And I think the universities have
been significantly helpful in this area and yet
cannot afford to run the kinds of programs that
demand huge pieces of systems and equipment. And
yet I think perhaps Woods Hole, and believe it or
not, even Texas A&M, now with their advent of, I
believe, putting the Perry Cub Marine and getting
engineering-wise, are probably the two most
advanced in what I call engineering. Scripps
would get very upset in Miami and all the rest of
them, and they would say, well, putting out buoys
in engineering. That's not what I mean. I mean
undersea technology, the ability to operate at
any depth, at any time, at any place in the world's
ocean, which is my objective, my military
mission, and I never will achieve it as long as I
live or my son lives, but I'd sure give it a healthy
college try. And that's costly because that
demands huge systems, long development times,
and large expenditures of money, even more so than
Oceania. Now, in 1953, let's say, when you arrived
and looked over the bureaucratic organization in
Washington, when were you first struck that
consolidation had to take place? I'm being
unfair. You seem to be a consolidator all along
because the assistant secretary asks you, what
would you do? And you say, I would consolidate or I
would abolish it. Do you usually look at problems
this way? Yes, I guess I do. I guess I have a weakness
of always wanting to get a critical mass. I guess my
disgust with science, my disgust with anything
I've ever done is that to watch various people
doing little bits and pieces and realize that that
it lacks a critical mass. And you don't
necessarily have to consolidate to get a critical
mass. But you can't run a three-man post office
department in science or engineering and
everybody tries to do it. It takes a certain amount
of manpower. And this doesn't mean they all have to
work for one boss. And this doesn't mean they all
have to be under one roof. But it means they all have
to be pulling together. And it's very difficult to
get people pulling together unless you
physically put them together or you let them meet
all the time. And in the academic world, I think
we've been very fortunate, certainly up until
very recently, of being able to get them all
working together and meeting together, but not
necessarily working together geographically.
But they're being forced to work together in large
sea experiments geographically because nobody
can any longer afford to do his own experiments. In
a sense, the system is driving it that way. And I
look at that as the word critical mass. And maybe
that's because of my nuclear physics background.
But to me, that means something. That means it can
run on its own. That means it can survive. That
means it can, in fact, recreate and generate. It
can, in fact, create matter. Now, that's my
layman's view of what I mean by critical mass. And
I'm concerned that in oceanography, we tend to...
to have a lot of little isolated groups. But I do not
think this is a problem in the academic
oceanography, but it's certainly now a problem in
the engineering side of oceanography. Terrible.
I have a follow-up question on that I intend to ask
later from something you said previously, but
you're now like that. Does it not seem to you that
such things as 200-mile limits, international
conferences, In effect, that oceanography has,
world oceanography, has become more and more
involved in the political realm with the
development of third world powers? Absolutely.
Does that seem to work against your idea of
creating critical masses? Yes, it does, because
there are lots of people in the bureaucracy that
like to isolate things by how you do them as opposed
to specific disciplines. I think the
oceanographic community and the Navy in
particular were very remiss not to forecast what
was going to happen with the 200-mile limit. I
certainly know that Dr. Wakeman did. I know we did
in the Secretary's office. We were just basically
not listened to. We really weren't prepared for
this. I think that the... The interesting part of
oceanography, again, which is again unique in the
scientific sense, and this speaks to the
international sense, is that what happens on the
coast of Africa may very well affect what happens
on the coast of North America. Now, you can trap me
here and maybe I'm in the wrong realm of current
flow and basin flow and theory, but certainly my
statement in general is true. And this basically
says that you have to work together. It doesn't
mean you have to do it under the United Nations,
under a single organization. But again, you're
going to have to have at least a group of people that
have subcritical mass so that when they can
survive on their own and at the same time they're
they can gain by working together with someone
else. And this has been our big push in scientific
academic oceanography to ensure that the world
does not think of these people as exploiters, but
rather as people who are trying to explore and lay
the basis for their own benefits. We can't just
say, I want to look at what's off my own coast and try
to figure out what effect it's going to have on the
atmospheric weather, on where the fish go, where
are the minerals, how do we get the best
point-to-point transportation. I think we
certainly should have learned in this country by
now, we may never have learned it, but you don't
move large masses of things by air. The McNamara
philosophy of everything's done by air, it was
disproved certainly in Vietnam where still 98% of
everything went by sea. You're moving tremendous
tonnages of food, of petroleum products, of
machinery, of equipment, and of course in the
military also of ammunition. Now, it is better to
move men by air and to move certain other things,
but the Flying Tigers World War II bootstrap
operation to carry 50 gallons of gas to get five
there is not only inefficient, but it's almost
impossible in modern technology. That's an
opinion, but I think we're seeing the revival of
the importance of marine transportation. And
yet, interestingly enough, the politics of the
merchant marine have been so sticky that
everybody who's tried to look at how you bring
consolidation together in the federal
government has been afraid to tackle it. And I've
been involved in almost every single tackling of
it. consolidation or bringing things together or
cutting up the pie that's been, it doesn't mean I'm
running it, but I've certainly been involved in it
as a staff member or as a guy sitting on the outside.
Oceanography, of course, has been escalated to
the White House, if you want to look at it that way,
from the Humphrey era when he was chairman of what
we used to call the Wet Space Committee, which is
what the Marine Sciences Council. Another thing
that, well, I guess that's it.
Politics play a very important part in
oceanography, and I guess I didn't realize that
initially, because I'd never been thrown into
politics until I got into oceanography.
You can see why I get concerned.
The world is negative. They'll cut you when you
don't look at it.
Well, I have a follow-up now on this idea of
international cooperation. How do you as a Navy
man, for example, feel about what seems to be,
because of the need to bring a critical mass
together, to use your word, they're growing
international cooperation from the ships at sea.
The Soviet Union, the Norwegians, the Americans
have done more than just a few joint ventures,
including Moho, for example. I don't have any
heartburn with that. I guess perhaps many people
do. But if you go back and analyze the history of
going to sea in general, seamen generally fought
as gentlemen and generally hated to fight. They
were all after you, Alphonse, and they'd all stand
off while two people battled it out. And I think the
reason for that, again, is the environment. The
environment was so destructive and so
overwhelming that the respect for the
environment was so great that people fought, if
you will, gentlemanly wars. The thing that
destroyed the The attempted to destroy
gentlemanly wars were pirating back many, many
hundreds of years ago, periodically, and that was
finally, I guess the American Navy was the one that
wiped that out for the rest of the world. Then the
next thing that began to attempt to destroy the
gentleman's agreement, as I call it, of how we all
are bound together by the sea rather than by the
national flag, was the advent of the submarine,
who would stick his periscope up and fire
indiscriminately at passenger ships and
warships. That certainly has caused us a lot of
problems, and Yet, on the other hand, that's
perhaps maybe even brought us together on
occasion. I think that seamen have historically
been more afraid of the sea than they have of the
enemy. Maybe that's an over-exaggeration. I
think they've certainly been willing to sit down.
I think there's another thing that many people
don't recognize, and that is that if you are king of
Xavier, say, for example, and I bring a ship in, I
bring it in because I ask you if I may bring it in. And
you as a gentleman say, well, certainly. But
interestingly enough, I'm really not resident in
your country. You can tell me tomorrow morning at 8
o'clock to get my butt out and I can go. Whereas you
might be reluctant politically to bring in an air
group and put it in your backyard or an army tent
because that's symbolic. Whereas the ship is
merely tied by lines to your pier and is by law, a
warship by law, is still sovereign territory and
land of the country to which it belongs. So you're
taking a piece of America and temporarily tying it
up along the Xavier Principality or whatever
country you have, and I think that This is
particularly true in science. Now, when you get
into hardware, then you're talking something
else. Then you're talking competition for
economic or other reasons which may be different.
And I think you will find the biggest heartburn
comes in sharing technology which may destroy you
economically or militarily rather than sharing
science. in the ocean. That's an opinion, but I
certainly think that I have the full support of the
hierarchy of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
Secretariat on fully supporting international
science. There are many people who would not like
to do this, but as far as policy is concerned, I have
the full support, and I think that's an
interesting thing because you wouldn't get that
in other fields. I have another question that
leads to about consolidation here. Would your
plans of consolidation or your attempt to... and
probably successful to move to Mississippi been
possible without computers? Absolutely not. The
thing that made a consolidation down there
possible are two things, three things. Good air
transportation, good computer tied-in systems,
and good communication systems. In fact, we don't
have the best communication system down there.
We've got a Navy communication system, and right
now there's a lot better commercial
communication, television, satellite systems
for command and control available other than the
kind the Navy has. And I'm looking forward to maybe
getting one of those because I think that if you're
going to prove to yourself you can run something
outside of the center of the bureaucracy where the
heartbeat of the bureaucracy is, you've got to be
sure you know what it's doing and can use it to
justify your thousands of requests that come in
from the bureaucracy all right well uh along that
line would it have been possible for for you to
think in terms of organization of a bureaucratic
institution as bringing the various elements of
oceanography together in one building if you had
not been in one of the early disciplines or
scientists which involve computer work that is
nuclear physics
i don't really understand that question well uh
The first beginning of organizations in science,
I would argue, comes from those nuclear
physicists, particularly nuclear... Oh, the
Manhattan Project. Oh, absolutely. But that was
brought together for a different reason, and
there were not computers then. The Navy was
working on its first computer with Harvard called
the Mark I Brain down at Dahlgren, Virginia, as I
remember it, in the late 30s. The reason they
brought the physicists together was just because
it was an early discipline. They needed to get out
in some remote location because they were
fighting in a sense of what they might find when
they developed it. They were going to develop it
not as a scientific tool, but towards a specific
end project. I mean, everybody knew exactly what
they were going to try to do with it. So they put them
together, and of course it only lasted during the
war, and the scientific part of it almost fell
apart within months after the war was over. At
least I was over there at Los Alamos right after the
war. That doesn't true. There were great brains,
Teller, Oppenheimer, so forth. But basically the
real desire to work together disintegrated at the
end of World War II, as I read it. even though we were
trying to work on the hydrogen bomb. But the real
motivation to work together for, if you will,
survival against the so-called Axis powers was
what I think gave the, not the impetus for the
consolidation, but the real reason that let them
come together and put everything together. And of
course, there were problems there. The problems
there were mostly military, where if you had a PhD
in nuclear physics, you were a buck private, and if
you were driving the major, you were probably a top
sergeant. That's another problem. Well, how do
you explain, then, your developing interest in
consolidation? When is it first apparent to you in
63 that the parts of oceanography have got to be
consolidated? Because none of them had enough
capability on their own to ever either articulate
the need for the importance to the oceans... the
need for the oceans in their business, or worse
than that, what it is they wanted to do when they got
together. Because we were doing it through
committee work, but it was getting bigger. And
once it got big enough so that it became huge, you
just can't sit down with a group of 12 people around
a table. In 1963, I'll bet you by the end of the time
Tex Treadwell had trained me, I'll bet you I knew
90% of everybody working in oceanography, or knew
of them, and I bet I knew almost that much of what
they were doing. Today, I don't even know what the
Navy's doing. It's gotten so diffuse that I can't
really tell you what we're doing in great detail,
even within the Navy, much less within the rest of
the world. Now, you can say that's maybe
bureaucracy, but I think as the group gets bigger,
as the as the instruments become more
complicated, more sophisticated, as the
necessity for working together to solve the
technical problems. For example, in
oceanography, no longer, in my opinion, can a man
take a thesis and take a ship and go to sea and make a
significant thesis. Now, you'll get a thesis and
get a Ph.D. that way, but as far as really beginning
to solve the problems of what is the ocean like,
you're now well beyond a single oceanographer
dipping his wick in a single ship. I mean, we are at
the point right now where, to do a job right, we tie a
satellite or an aircraft or some other kind of
worldwide sensor in with the ground truth of the
ship. And if you start looking at it from that
viewpoint and you look at it from a military
viewpoint, the military man has long known that
one person working independently doesn't
accomplish very much except in espionage, but in
operations he accomplishes very little. Perhaps
it's the military mind or the experience when
you're working together. But I don't really mean
when I say consolidate to put everything under one
individual. Consolidate to me is to consolidate
one's effort, initiative, and raison
d'etre, why we're here and what we're trying to do.
I would not go beyond the consolidation I think we
have now achieved in the academic world. I think
that's about the optimum. What sort of opposition
did you meet in the beginning? You mean from 63? 63.
The opposition of the people who call themselves
oceanographers but didn't really want to because
they had been in another discipline or they were
mapmakers or they didn't want to do this or didn't
want to do that. In the Navy, everybody has his own
organization, so therefore he doesn't want
somebody else to serve him. If it were sexy or
fascinating or necessary, he'd probably do it
himself, but he wouldn't want to do it with
somebody else. I think it's probably a
relationship of Parkinson's first, second,
third, and fourth laws combined together with the
Peter Principle It says that humans, being what we
are, will never really attempt to do the ultimate,
but to do that which we see can be done most
expeditiously. Now, and how did you handle
problems in reorganization? Did you try to
transfer people out? No. Try to reason with them?
Try to reason with them. I never tried at that time
to hit people over the head because I wasn't that
type of individual, nor did I think we would gain
very much. I think we only transferred one
individual, and the reason for that was in trying
to set up a new program for surface type of ships,
that is, and that's part of oceanography in a
sense, in trying to design new hull forms and break
through the frontier that we found the individual
most competent to do this was sitting up in an air
development center, and he was too remotely
associated with the people who went to sea and too
intimately associated with the people who flew
all the time so that To put him in charge of a new
design of ships, he needed to have some kind of tie
to the people who had some capability. I don't
think you ever want to bind people to the past, but
you certainly would like to link them so that they
can come down that tradition and pick from the past
what's important and yet reject the old if it isn't
important. You can't be too tied, but you have to be
somehow willing to get some support from the past.
or by the past, I mean in this case, the capability.
Many people argue that's not right, that you just
go out in the wilderness, you carve out a hunk of
desert, and you start from scratch. Well, they did
that at Los Alamos, but that was a wartime
situation, and everybody knew what they wanted to
achieve, and the question was how to achieve it. I
think in oceanography, we've only had glimpses of
what it is we wanted, but we've never been totally
able to articulate exactly what we wanted. And
probably until that happens, we'll... have a
difficult time. Look, can that happen in
something as fast-changing as the Navy? It's
happened before. It only happens once in the,
probably in a generation. We went from sail to
steam and it damn near killed everybody. We went
into the submarine Navy and they tried to ignore
it. We went into the battleship Navy and they tried
to ignore that in Civil War and then we got so
entrenched in the battleship Navy we couldn't get
in the air Navy and now we're in the air Navy and so
entrenched now we can't see the rest of the Navy and
it's interesting. Well,
you look
at what you think the Navy will look like 20 X number
of years in the future. you also ask yourself very
broad scientific questions. You ask yourself,
what are the fundamental requirements? Not what
requirements are dictated by what you have or what
you may have, but what are the fundamental
requirements? And I guess it was very easy for me as
an individual who had no knowledge whatsoever to
be very fundamental. You know, my comment, the
Navy must have the capability to operate at any
time, at any depth, at any point in the world's
ocean is a very simple statement, but that
generates about $10 billion worth of
requirements. That says you've got to build a
submersible that goes down to 36,000 feet. That
says you've got to have remote control vehicles
that can do the same. And then from that, you say,
well, now where can I get from there? And how
important is it? And where do I put my priorities?
And you suddenly recognize that very little of the
ocean is deeper than 20,000 feet. So why pay 10
times as much for a capability to get that 2%?
Because the day we need it so badly, we'll go to
20,000. So we'll design our systems around 20,000
foot depth. So you can say, well, I didn't meet my
major objective, but I met, say, 98% of it. It's
always a give and take. The argument of whether you
use, for example, you could say, well, I want all my
equipment manned. I want all my equipment
unmanned. You can use the space argument. I think
we in oceanography and ocean engineering and
undersea technology We've looked at it from three
basic ways of doing business. You do it with a man in
the vehicle, you do it remotely from a surface
vessel, or you do it in some combination thereof.
So you look at what combinations could you
possibly do, and you get the surface ship that can
put a pipe type of arrangement, stiff arrangement
down on the bottom. You get the surface ship that
can tow a flexible cable in the fish, and then you
get the The vehicle itself, and the vehicle
happens to be called a submersible, and they make
many kinds of submersibles. And ideally, and I've
been fighting for it for years and never won, I
wanted a large submarine, non-combatant, that
carried little baby submersibles that could
operate below the surface air interface so that
you could launch at any time of the day and you could
do things in the complete oblivion of a relatively
tranquil environment from a surface wave combo.